Trust and decoration v1 (#1186)
vector-im/element-meta: docs/crypto/trust_v1.md

# Trust & decorations v1

| Status | Last updated |
|--|--|
| Draft | March 29, 2023 |

> This document aims to describe the user-facing changes on the classic Element clients that will be made with the introduction of TOFU.

Reviewer: To double check, the implication here is that this document does *not* describe Element X semantics, leaving the option to make them stricter than described here, correct?

Author: Yes, exactly. EX will get an own spec that should have a broader scope and new concepts around trust & decorations. This document is explicitly for the TOFU implementation in the current clients.

**Table of contents**

## General guidelines, context, use cases

1. As a security-aware user I want to notice when the identity of users I'm communication with changes so that I can make sure that the authenticity is still intact via other means.
2. 
x. As an organization/user, untrusted devices of other users always pose a threat to information security as it is impossible to determine the authenticity of the logged-in user.

## Indicators

For the first iteration in the classic Element clients, only the room indicators are relevant.

### Room

- Indicator for room encryption (on/off)
- Indicator for room integrity (currently part of the 'room encryption' indicator)
  - Shows information on an individual user's view
  - Use cases
    - Do I trust the identities of all other users in the room? Yes/No
    - Is there an identity mismatch with a verified user?
  - States (**currently**)

>     - Room is encrypted but the user trusts no other user (grey shield)

Reviewer: This isn't accurate. It's more like

```suggestion
    - Room is encrypted but not all users have been verified, and those that have (if any) still have the verified identity (grey shield)
```

Reviewer: | Verified users | States possible |
|------|---------------------------|
| none | grey |
| some | grey, red |
| all | red, green |

    - Room is encrypted but at least one user violates trust (identity mismatch; red shield with exclamation mark)
    - Room is encrypted and the user trusts all other users (green shield with checkmark)
  - States (**with TOFU**)
    - Room is encrypted and other users are TOFU-trusted (grey shield)

>     - Room is encrypted but at least one user violates **manual** trust (identity mismatch; red shield with exclamation mark)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Room is encrypted but at least one user violates its **verified** identity (identity mismatch; red shield with exclamation mark)
```

See below for rationale of this wording.

>     - Room is encrypted and the user has **manual** trust with all other users

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Room is encrypted and the user has **verified** the identity of all other users in the room
```

See below for rationale of this wording.

Reviewer: This doesn't mention green shields. Is this deliberate?

Author: The last bullet point was meant to be green shields. Just forgot to add it.

## Behavior for identity mismatch

An identity mismatch can occur due to key reset or malicious activity. This scenario **can't be fixed by the user**. 
The default behavior should be different depending on how trust has been established in the first place.

### TOFU-trusted user

> - Other users will see a room event informing them about the identity change and giving some further information on possible reasons and what to do

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Other users will see a room notice informing them about the identity change and giving some further information on possible reasons and what to do
```

Avoid saying "room event" as that has a defined technical meaning.

> - The new identity is automatically trusted via TOFU again

Reviewer: Why? From a security perspective, a mismatch for a TOFU-trusted user is equally bad as a mismatch for a verified user.

Reviewer: My guess is we are probably using TOFU vs verified as an indication of how serious the users are about security, but I'd like confirmation of that guess.

Author: > From a security perspective, a mismatch for a TOFU-trusted user is equally bad as a mismatch for a verified user.

Well, as you have a higher level of authenticity with a verified user and deliberately took care to have it, I'm making this distinction here. Also, this is the default behavior. We might introduce config to add stricter behavior for higher sensitivity environments later.

> My guess is we are probably using TOFU vs verified as an indication of how serious the users are about security, but I'd like confirmation of that guess.

Yes, that is the idea. TOFU happens automatically without the user noticing or doing something about it.

Reviewer: > Well, as you have a higher level of authenticity with a verified user and deliberately took care to have it, I'm making this distinction here.

This is true in the sense that the *initially* presented identity can be a spoofed one in TOFU, which it can't be if the identity was verified. However, I think it's important to stress that a *change* in the presented identity has exactly the same semantics in TOFU and verification: it's a signal of either malicious activity or the user rotating their identity.

> We might introduce config to add stricter behavior for higher sensitivity environments later.

👍🏻

Author: > My guess is we are probably using TOFU vs verified as an indication of how serious the users are about security, but I'd like confirmation of that guess.

I've made that explicit in the use case section now.

- Users can communicate as before

> ### Manually trusted user (!WIP!)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Verified user (!WIP!)
```

Saying "verification" emphasizes there was a mechanical verification step performed rather than just blind trust. I would also avoid calling it "manual", as to me it implies there is an equivalent automatic process which is simply not true. Verification is strictly better than TOFU-trust.

- Other users will be asked to verify the new identity to resolve the situation (manual verification)
- Users can communicate as before (unless they use the setting _Never send encrypted messages to unverified sessions from this session_)

## Behavior for untrusted devices

When a user has a logged-in device that has not been verified with the identity of the user (using another device or a recovery method + key backup), the device will be untrusted and it is not possible to ensure that the device belongs to the actual user. This scenario **can be fixed by the respective user** by verifying the device. 

To keep security and integrity intact, the following measures will be taken
- Isolate untrusted devices in encrypted rooms (can't send/receive messages) so that no information is accidentally leaked

### Isolation of untrusted devices

If users deviate from the regular processes or there is a malicious homeserver inserting new devices, unverified devices can appear.

To cover for the risk of information leakage, the following steps will be taken
1. Users on unverified devices cannot send or receive messages in encrypted rooms

> 2. Users on unverified devices are informed about this state and guided to device verification to resolve it

Reviewer: While this is a nice UX change to guide users into properly setting up their own devices, it cannot be considered a security control.

Such a control would need to be implemented on the *receiving* end instead. Receivers should stop sending to-device messages (most importantly: secrets and room keys) *to* such devices and decrypting messages *from* such devices.

Author: Well, I assume that technically we will take the right measures to make this work. Better guidance to completely avoid unverified devices in regular operations is planned for FTUE in EX (force verification), btw., but I don't want to touch these parts in the current clients now.

Reviewer: Makes sense not to focus on current clients, just wanted to see whether we were on the same page for EX.

For the first iteration in the classic Element clients, only the room indicators are relevant.

### Room

- Indicator for room encryption (on/off)
- Indicator for room integrity (currently part of the 'room encryption' indicator)
  - Shows information on an individual user's view
  - Use cases
    - Do I trust the identities of all other users in the room? Yes/No
    - Is there an identity mismatch with a verified user?
  - States (**currently**)
    - Room is encrypted but not all users have been verified, and those that have (if any) still have the verified identity (grey shield)
    - Room is encrypted but at least one user violates trust (identity mismatch; red shield with exclamation mark)
    - Room is encrypted and the user trusts all users (green shield with checkmark)
      - The set of “all users” depends on the type of room:
        - For regular / topic rooms, all users including yourself, are considered when decorating a room
        - For 1:1 and group DM rooms, all other users (i.e. excluding yourself) are considered when decorating a room
  - States (**with TOFU**)
    - Room is encrypted and other users are TOFU-trusted and only have verified devices (grey shield)

>     - Room is encrypted but at least one user violates its **verified** identity (identity mismatch; red shield with exclamation mark)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Room is encrypted but at least one user violates its **verified** identity or has unverified devices (identity mismatch; red shield with exclamation mark)
```

Given the newest additions, this needs to be stated explicitly I think.

Author: Considering that we will isolate unverified devices in the future, do you still think that the indicator needs to reflect this case? The thing is that other users have no means to resolve it. Only the user on an unverified device can do something about it. And we will not leak information to unverified devices anyway so it might not be a security concern?

Reviewer: I agree with this line of reasoning, but that only applies once we actually start isolating unverified devices. Removing the warning before then would simply leave us with no security at all.

Author: Yeah, agreed. Isolating unverified devices will be done together with TOFU.
